Title: SQLAlchemy and Relationship
Date: 2014-12-22
Category: Python
Authors: Dee Kras


##Moving along with SQLAlchemy and ... Relationships

Most of programming is not a simple flat table. Mostly, there are several tables, and there is something that links them - the tables have relationships.

So going back to the small membership program from the [previous post](link), let's add a purchases table, where we can keep track of all purchases each member makes.  The two tables are linked by the `member_id`. They have a relationship.

Each member can have several purchases.  The one member can have many purchases. That is a **one-to-many relationship**.

###Let's set that up in SQLAlchemy:

This is the Member class we set up last time:

```python

class Member(Base):
    __tablename__ = 'members'

    member_id = Column(Integer, primary_key=True, autoincrement=True)
    inquiry_date = Column(DateTime, default=datetime.now())
    active__date = Column(DateTime, nullable=True)
    inactive__date = Column(DateTime, nullable=True)
    last_name = Column(String)
    first_name = Column(String)
    email_address = Column(String)
    password = Column(String)
    is_active = Column(Boolean, default=False)

```

And now we will set up the Purchase class.

```python

class Purchase(Base):
    __tablename__ = 'purchases'

    purchase_id = Column(Integer, primary_key=True)
    member_id = Column(Integer, ForeignKey('members.member_id'))
    item_id = Column(String)
    purchase_date = Column(DateTime, default=datetime.now())
    purchase_amt = Column(Integer)
```

Let's go back to the Member class and add the relevant code to the bottom.

```python

purchases = relationship("Purchase", backref="members")
```

And we have to add a bit to the `imports` - `relationship`, `backref`, `ForeignKey`

```python

from sqlalchemy.orm import relationship, backref, sessionmaker
from sqlalchemy import create_engine, Column, Integer, DateTime, String, ForeignKey
```
**Explanations**

The Purchase class is pretty straightforward. It is based on the `Base` class and it has a primary key. The interesting piece is in the args of `member_id`.  Remember, the `member_id` is the one field that both tables share; it creates the relationship. So we have to state that somehow.(More about [relationships](http://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/rel_0_9/orm/basic_relationships.html))

The `purchases` table is a 'child' of the `members` table, which is its parent.

`member_id = Column(Integer, ForeignKey('members.member_id'))`

   - `Integer`: The data type must be the same in both tables.
   - `ForeignKey('members.member_id')` : This states that it is the 'child' of the `members` table, specifically linked to the `member_id`.
     - It is linked to the field in the `members` table, not the `Member` class.

`purchases = relationship("Purchase", backref="members")`

   - This is the link to the 'child'. The `relationship` is on the 'parent' class.
   - `backref`. This establishes the bi-directional relationship - from the many to the one, from the child to the parent.
   - `backref` is a shortcut for creating the relationship instead of creating the relationships in  both classes. Much more about [backref](http://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/orm/backref.html)
   - This establishes `Member.purchases`; purchases is an attribute of Member class.
   - And it also establishes `Purchase.member`; `member is an attribute of Purchase class.

So now the relationships between the 2 tables has been established.  

-------

###Queries for tables with relationships

Let's say we want to know who purchased what.  We need the name data from the **members** table and the purchase data from the **purchases** table.  We need a query that somehow pulls from both tables.  There are some query(args) for that.


Here's a simple query of 2 tables:

```python

def items_purchased_by_purchaser():
    purchases = session.query(Member, Purchase).\
                        filter(Purchase.member_id == Member.member_id).\
                        order_by(Purchase.member_id).\
                        all()
    for  member, purchase in purchases:
        print purchase.member_id, purchase.purchase_date

```

   - both classes are included in the args of the query.
   - the filter is when `member_id` in the `Member` class is equal to the `member_id` in the Purchase class.
   - in the `for` statement,  the order of the 2 variables matters. It must be in the same order that the classes were listed in the args.  (Member is first, so the object that will hold all Member's attributes must be first)
   - it uses `order_by`
   - and it returns all results


**Here is another function that will have the same results** - another way to write the query. Using a `join`.


```python

def items_purchased_by_purchaser():
    purchases = session.query(Purchase, Member).\
                join(Member.purchases).\
                order_by(Purchase.member_id).\
                all()
    for purchase, member in purchases:
        print purchase.member_id, member.last_name, purchase.purchase_date

```

   - the `join` works because the relationship has already been declared previously when we created the classes.
   - include both classes in the query(paren)

**And one more way to write the query.**

```python

def items_purchased_by_purchaser():
    purchases = session.query(Purchase, Member).\
                join(Purchase).\
                join(Member).\
                order_by(Purchase.member_id).\
                all()
    for purchase, member in purchases:
        print purchase.member_id, member.last_name, purchase.purchase_date
```

