Title: Django: Validations during Form Processing
Date: 2015-05-15
Category: Django
Authors: Dee Kras


*This post is mostly based on the Django Docs on [Form and Field Validation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/forms/validation/#cleaning-a-specific-field-attribute). I reformatted the information in a way that feels easier to use.*

<br>

There are 3 types of cleaning methods that are run during form processing. These are normally executed when you call the `is_valid()` method on a form.  (`is_valid()` runs validation routines for all fields on the form. When this method is called, if all fields contain valid data, it will:

   - return True
   - place the form’s data in its `cleaned_data` attribute.)

In general, any cleaning method can raise a `ValidationError` if there is a problem with the data it is processing; it passes the relevant information to the `ValidationError` constructor. 

###Steps of validation 
The methods below are run in the order given, one field at a time. That is, for each field in the form (in the order they are declared in the form definition). Then the `form.clean()`, or its override, is executed regardless if the previous methods have raised errors.
If the `Field.clean()` method raises a `ValidationError`, its field-specific cleaning methods are not called. However, the cleaning methods for all remaining fields are still executed.

Normally, the `clean()` method will be run and it will take care of the first three validations (`to_python()`, `validate()`, `run_validators()`). But you can customize any of them, and when the clean() method is executed, it will run the customized method.

**1. `to_python()` method on a Field**

   - **WHAT IT DOES:**  It coerces the value to correct datatype and raises `ValidationError` if that is not possible. This method accepts the raw value from the widget and returns the converted value.

   - **EXAMPLE:**  a FloatField will turn the data into a Python float or raise a ValidationError.

   - **HANDLES ERRORS:** raises `ValidationError` on any error

   - **RETURNS:** returns the converted value.

<br>

**2. `validate()` method on a Field**

   - **WHAT IT DOES:**  handles field-specific validation that is not suitable for a validator. It takes a value that has been coerced to correct datatype and raises ValidationError on any error. 

   - **HANDLES ERRORS:** raises `ValidationError` on any error

   - **RETURNS:** This method does not return anything and shouldn’t alter the value. 

   - ** NOTES: ** You should override it to handle validation logic that you can’t or don’t want to put in a validator.

<br>

**3. `run_validators()` method on a Field**

   - **WHAT IT DOES:**  runs all of the field’s validators 

   - **HANDLES ERRORS:** aggregates all the errors into a single ValidationError.

   - **RETURNS:** 

   - **NOTES:** You shouldn’t need to override this method.

<br>

**4. The `clean()` method on a Field subclass.**

   - **WHAT IT DOES:**  This is responsible for running `to_python`, `validate` and `run_validators` in the correct order and propagating their errors. 

   - **HANDLES ERRORS:** If, at any time, any of the methods raise `ValidationError`, the validation stops and that error is raised. 

   - **RETURNS:** This method returns the clean data, which is then inserted into the `cleaned_data` dictionary of the form.

<br>
**5. The `clean_<fieldname>()` method in a form subclass**
– where `<fieldname>` is replaced with the name of the form field attribute.

   - **WHAT IT DOES:**  This method does any cleaning that is specific to that particular attribute, unrelated to the type of field that it is. 

   - **HOW TO USE:** This method is not passed any parameters. You will need to look up the value of the field in self.cleaned_data and remember that it will be a Python object at this point, not the original string submitted in the form (it will be in `cleaned_data` because the general field `clean()` method, above, has already cleaned the data once).

   - **HANDLES ERRORS: **

   - **RETURNS:** the cleaned value obtained from cleaned_data  -- regardless of whether it changed anything or not.

<br>
**6. The Form subclass’s `clean()` method. **

   - **WHAT IT DOES:**  This method can perform any validation that requires access to multiple fields from the form at once. 

   - **EXAMPLE:** Checks that if field A is supplied, field B must contain a valid email address and the like.

   - **HOW TO USE:** Since the field validation methods have been run by the time `clean()` is called, you also have access to the form’s errors attribute which contains all the errors raised by cleaning of individual fields.

   - **HANDLES ERRORS:** Note that any errors raised by your `Form.clean()` override will not be associated with any field in particular. They go into a special “field” (called `__all__`), which you can access via the `non_field_errors()` method if you need to. If you want to attach errors to a specific field in the form, you need to call `add_error()`.

   - **RETURNS:** This method can return a completely different dictionary if it wishes, which will be used as the cleaned_data.
   - **NOTES:** Also note that there are special considerations when overriding the `clean()` method of a ModelForm subclass.  (see the [ModelForm documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/topics/forms/modelforms/#overriding-modelform-clean-method) for more information)


<hr>

###Raising ValidationError examples:

```python
if not flag:
    raise ValidationError('Please submit flag') –  a simple example
```

```python
    raise ValidationError(_('text: %(flag)s'), 
                            code='no flag', 
                            params={'flag': '42'},)
```
**multiple errors**
can be created as a list

```python
    raise ValidationError([
        ValidationError(_('Error 1'), code='error1'),
        ValidationError(_('Error 2'), code='error2'),
    ])
```



###Writing Validators
There are many builtin validators that match the field type (ex: EmailValidator 
 for EmailField). Those validators can be customized too. (ex: ```class EmailValidator([message=None, code=None, whitelist=None])```

**Here's a sample custom validator:**

```python
from django.core.exceptions import ValidationError

def validate_even(value):
   if value % 2 != 0:
      raise ValidationError('%s is not an even number' % value)
```

Then, this validator can be used for any fields when setting up the models:
```python
class MyModel(models.Model):
   even_field = models.IntegerField(validators=[validate_even])
```

It can also be used for forms:
```python
class MyForm(forms.Form):
   even_field = forms.IntegerField(validators=[validate_even])
```
Validators will not be run automatically when you save a model, but if you are using a ModelForm, it will run your validators on any fields that are included in your form.